New SQLite driver for WordPress (🎥)


Jan Jakeš
5:43 pm on February 13, 2025
A new SQLite driver, aiming at significantly improving SQLite support in WordPress, has just landed in our fork of the SQLite Database Integration. Currently, it’s behind a feature flag and can be considered a beta. Today, I presented it to +orbitp2 and you can find the recording below.

🕹️ You can also try the new driver in WordPress Playground now.

The new SQLite driver translates MySQL queries into SQLite statements and emulates MySQL behavior using a new robust AST-based approach, comprising:

A complete, fast MySQL SQL lexer written in pure PHP with zero dependencies.
A complete, version-aware MySQL SQL grammar definition, adapted from MySQL Workbench grammar.
Basic tooling to process and compress the grammar in pure PHP.
An extra lightweight, universal grammar parser written in pure PHP with zero dependencies, by @zieladam.
An extensive test suite of MySQL 70 000 queries that we can parse successfully.
A new SQLite driver that translates and emulates MySQL queries on top of SQLite, using the AST produced by the new parser.
An comprehensive MySQL information schema emulation on top of SQLite.
Advanced SQLite support for WordPress is essential for WordPress Playground and derived projects and apps, including WordPress Studio, but it’s also important in itself to make WordPress fully SQLite-compatible and establish official SQLite support in WordPress.

Presentation 🎥
I presented the architecture and internals of the new driver today, and here’s the recording:


Project context
Here’s a summary of the most important links and explorations related to the project:

Proposal to support nuances of the SELECT syntax: WITH, UNION, subqueries etc. by @zieladam.
Proposal to switch to an AST-based approach, including an extensive research of existing grammars and parsers by @zieladam.
An amazing AI lexer and parser generation exploration by @zieladam.
Exhaustive MySQL parser by @zieladam and @janjakes.
New AST-based SQLite driver by @janjakes.
Next steps
Currently, the new SQLite driver passes the legacy driver test suite, and it can run WordPress, including many plugins. That said, it needs to be considered a beta until we evaluate the plugin compatibility when compared to the legacy driver.

Here’s what I think we need to focus on next (roughly, but not necessarily, in this order):

Manually examine the old driver to ensure 100% coverage.
Evaluate the coverage of WordPress Core unit tests (related Playground ticket).
Evaluate plugin compatibility using Playground Tester by @berislavgrgicak.
Identify impactful fixes for some of the failures reported by the test suites.
Evaluate performance, optimize the parser and the driver.
Support all WP-CLI commands.
Monitor support for all the SQL queries used by all the WordPress plugins.
Stabilize new APIs.
Beyond SQLite
The new lexer and parser pipeline lays foundations for support of other databases in WordPress. The first obvious candidate is PostgreSQL, which, I believe, can handle many more MySQL-like features than SQLite, which could make the driver simpler and more powerful.

I think the PostgreSQL support is worth investigating and prototyping also to scrutinize the design of the new APIs and to reveal possibilities for improvements.
